# Effluent Concentration Prediction App
## About
The purpose of this app is to predict effluent electrical conductivity, which is a good measure for indutries to evaluate and improve the quality of water in order to preserve the environment and protect public health. It's important that the wastewater that is returned to the water cycle is free of harmful pollutants and this metric allows us to determine if a treatment is effective. Although measuring electrical conductivity alone does not indicate the exact concentrations of ions in the water, it gives a broad overview on if there are pollutants in the water and if it is safe. Wastewater treatment plants can utilize this tool to determine if their water treatement is effective and can adjust and optimize their treatment plans accordingly.
## Usage
This app can be run through huggingface (https://huggingface.co/spaces/kaylayi18/EffluentConcentration). The required libraries are listed in the requirement.txt file. The user inputs various parameters and the model predicts the electrical conductivity of the effluent from these inputs. The user can then compare that prediction with the safe/unsafe EC ranges listed below the prediction to determine if treatment was effective and sufficient. The app also includes Deon's checklist and the ethics datacard that discusses and addresses several ethical considerations and concerns at the bottom of the app.
## Description
This repository includes the data preprocessing in google colab, the best/trained machine learning model, and Deon's checklist. The best model identified from training multiple machine learning models is KNN. The datasource for this project is from the Manresa Wastewater Treatment Plant collected from https://github.com/amroohi/Predict-wastewater and https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2024.120324, other acknowledgements and references are included in this repository as well. 

The ML model that was used to build this app is K-nearest neighbor (KNN). This model was chosen because over three evaluation metrics (RMSE, MAE and R^2), it performed the best. Out of the five ML models tested, it had the lowest RMSE, second to lowest MAE, and highest R^2, so taking all of these into account, KNN would provide the most accurate model. KNN is a supervised ML model uses a data point's proximity to a known set of data points for it's predictions. It's mainly used for tackling classification and regression problems.

Since this model uses data from one water treatment facility, there may be limited representation that does not reflect the diversity of conditions at other wastewater treatment facilities. Certain facilities may have different water treatment plans that are more or less effective than the plant used here and the country where the plant is located may also impose certain regulations that control how certain activities are performed. The size of the plant, climate conditions such as rainfall, and pollutant load may impact influents across plants. While this may provide an accurate prediction for this specific plant, it will not perform as accurately for others. Universal features that are likely to be used at other treatment plants are used in this model, so it can still be used with caution to make loose predictions elsewhere. As a warning, this model is to be used as a prediction only and to consult with professionals before taking any actions.
